MOVE VALUE BASED 
CHESS ENGINE 

ICS3U CULMINATING 
DRAFT 
DOCUMENTATION 

Mahadi Masuduzzaman 
Ryan Rawal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Requirements: 
Dictionary of specific terminology 

Term 

Chess Board 

Chess Piece 

Player 

AI Opponent 

Legal Move 

Check 

Checkmate 

Stalemate 

Point Value 

Point-Based AI 

Game Over 

Timer 

Definition 

An 8 x 8 grid where the game will be played. 
The board will be displayed in a Tkinter 
window that is 700x700 pixels. 

Game pieces like a pawn, rook, knight, 
bishop, and etc. 

User playing the game. Opposing the AI 
Opponent. 

The algorithmic computer controlled 
opponent that will be the opposing user. 

A move that follows the rules of chess. 

When the King is under the threat of being 
captured. 

When the King has no legal move to escape 
and is under the threat of being captured. 

When a player has no more legal moves, but 
their king is not currently in check, resulting 
in a draw. 

Point value assigned to each piece. For 
example, both the knight and bishop are worth 
3 points. Where the queen is worth 9 points. 

The AI opponent chooses moves by 
maximizing move value instead of using the 
generalized min-max algorithm. 

The condition where the game ends because 
of either a checkmate or a point-based win 
from the AI opponent. Another instance of the 
game ending could be running out of time. 

A count down from a specific time that will 
indicate when the game ends (winner will be 
based on who has the highest amount of 
points). 

Position Value 

The score given to a move based on how 

 
Development Value 

Safety Value 

Small Random Tie-Break Value 

Move Value 

Random Promotion 

Bias Value 

useful the destination square is.  

The score given to a move that helps move 
pieces from their starting positions into more 
useful positions. For example, moving the 
knight to the centre to gain more control. 

The score given to a move based on how safe 
the moved piece is after the move. A move 
has a lower safety value if it places an 
important piece where it can be captured. 

A small random score added to a move when 
multiple legal moves account to similar 
values. This is to prevent the AI from making 
the same moves each time. Value must be 
really small so that it does not deter it from its 
algorithmic behaviour. 

The total score assigned to a possible AI 
move. It is calculated by combining the point 
value, position value, development value, 
safety value, and a small random tie-break 
value. The AI will use the move value to 
determine the best legal move. 

The twist: at a random point in the game, one 
AI pawn will be promoted to a stronger piece. 
Contingent on move value analysis, the 
promotion can alter inner variables like 
position value, safety value, and development 
value, making the promoted piece more 
impactful. 

A value that is derived from the predicted 
player’s move value after the chosen AI 
move. This value can only be subtracted from 
the total move value as a way to prevent risky 
moves. 

User Standpoint Description 

For the user playing against the AI opponent, the software must provide the following: 

Game Setup 

●  The game launches and displays a chess board. 

 
 
 
 
●  All chess pieces will be in their starting positions. 
●  The player will be allotted the bottom half of the board. 
●  The AI will control the opposite side of the board. 
●  Either side of the board will be based on a randomized possibility of black or white. 
●  A timer will be displayed and will begin counting down after the first move. 
●  Both the player and AI will have their own timers. 
●  The user can see all the chess board, chess pieces and their placement, current score, and 

the time remaining. 

Gameplay 

●  The user can select a chess piece and attempt to move it. 
●  The engine will verify whether it is legal or not 

○  If the move is illegal the move will not be allowed and the canvas will not update 

and will remain in its initial position. 

○  If the move is legal then the canvas will update to the player's move. 

●  After the player makes a legal move the AI opponent will take its turn. 
●  The AI opponent chooses a move by scoring possible legal moves using point values, 

position value, development value, and safety value. 

●  At the beginning of the game, the AI will follow a randomly selected opening pattern. 
●  If the current opening pattern cannot be used because of the player’s moves, the AI will 

switch to its general point-based move system. 

●  The AI will generate all possible legal moves for its own pieces. 
●  Each possible move will receive a move value based on the point value, position value, 

development value, safety value, and a small random tie-break value. 

●  The AI will determine the player’s possible moves after each possible AI move and use 
the same move value system to attach values. Based on each possibility, the AI will 
subtract a bias value from risky moves to lower the move value to prevent playing risky 
moves. 

●  The move with the highest move value will be played by the AI. 
●  After the AI’s move, the canvas will update and it will once again be the player's turn. 
●  If a piece is captured, the captured piece will be removed from the board. 

○  The point value assigned to the piece will be allotted to either the player or AI 

depending on who captured the piece. 

●  The game will continue until checkmate, stalemate, the timer running out, or the AI 

reaching the required point total. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed Requirement: 

The following is a flowchart of how the point-based move system works: 

Test Case: 

Test Case 01 

Description 

AI Risky Move Test  The AI has multiple possible legal moves. One move gives a higher capture, but 

allows the player to capture an important AI piece next turn. The AI calculates the 
player’s response and subtracts the bias value and compares all move values. The 
AI should choose the move with the highest final move value. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
